Skip to content
trishume
syntect
Repository navigation
Code
Issues
69
 (69)
Pull requests
48
 (48)
Agents
Actions
Projects
Security and quality
Insights
Owner avatar
syntect
Public
trishume/syntect
Go to file
t
T
Name		
keith-hall
keith-hall
Merge pull request #645 from stefanobaghino/631-haskell-decl-captures…
4aa7803
 · 
4 days ago
.github/workflows
Bump actions/checkout from v4 to v6
last month
assets
Support pop: N + set: X as a combined match operation
2 weeks ago
benches
Add structured warnings for branch point expiry and rename ops variable
2 months ago
examples
Make syntest's summary output reflect every test-file outcome
2 weeks ago
scripts
Switch to docs.rs for documentation (#110)
9 years ago
src
Fix MSRV rustfmt and docs broken intra-doc links
last week
testdata
Decrement Haskell syntest baseline after capture re-emit fix
last week
tests
Support pop: N + set: X as a combined match operation
2 weeks ago
.git-blame-ignore-revs
ignore initial cargo fmt commit for git blame
2 years ago
.gitattributes
Turn off GitHub syntax highlighting of .snap files
11 months ago
.gitignore
Add Cargo.lock to avoid flaky CI
last year
.gitmodules
Bump Packages submodule from st3 to master
2 months ago
CHANGELOG.md
Replace eprintln! warnings with programmatic warnings() API
3 weeks ago
Cargo.lock
chore: bump deps (onig)
last week
Cargo.toml
chore: bump deps (onig)
last week
DESIGN.md
chore: Enhance readability of docs
7 years ago
LICENSE.txt
Add pure Rust versions of dump loading and creation
9 years ago
Makefile
Test fancy-regex mode in CI
6 years ago
Readme.md
Add zsh-patina to list of projects using syntect
3 weeks ago
codecov.yml
Travis: Add coverage using cargo-tarpaulin and codecov
9 years ago
Repository files navigation
README
MIT license
syntect
Crates.io Documentation Crates.io Build Status codecov

syntect is a syntax highlighting library for Rust that uses Sublime Text syntax definitions. It aims to be a good solution for any Rust project that needs syntax highlighting, including deep integration with text editors written in Rust. It's used in production by at least two companies, and by many open source projects.

If you are writing a text editor (or something else needing highlighting) in Rust and this library doesn't fit your needs, I consider that a bug and you should file an issue or email me. I consider this project mostly complete, I still maintain it and review PRs, but it's not under heavy development.

Important Links
API docs with examples: https://docs.rs/syntect
Changelogs and upgrade notes for past releases
Getting Started
syntect is available on crates.io. You can add it to your Cargo.toml with the following command

cargo add syntect
After that take a look at the documentation and the examples.

If you've cloned this repository, be sure to run

git submodule update --init
to fetch all the required dependencies for running the tests.

Features/Goals
 Work with many languages (accomplished through using existing grammar formats)
 Highlight super quickly, faster than nearly all text editors
 Include easy to use API for basic cases
 API allows use in fancy text editors with piece tables and incremental re-highlighting and the like.
 Expose internals of the parsing process so text editors can do things like cache parse states and use semantic info for code intelligence
 High quality highlighting, supporting things like heredocs and complex syntaxes (like Rust's).
 Include a compressed dump of all the default syntax definitions in the library binary so users don't have to manage a folder of syntaxes.
 Well documented, I've tried to add a useful documentation comment to everything that isn't utterly self explanatory.
 Built-in output to coloured HTML <pre> tags or 24-bit colour ANSI terminal escape sequences.
 Nearly complete compatibility with Sublime Text 3, including lots of edge cases. Passes nearly all of Sublime's syntax tests, see issue 59.
 Load up quickly, currently in around 23ms but could potentially be even faster.
Screenshots
There's currently an example program called syncat that prints one of the source files using hard-coded themes and syntaxes using 24-bit terminal escape sequences supported by many newer terminals. These screenshots don't look as good as they could for two reasons: first the sRGB colours aren't corrected properly, and second the Rust syntax definition uses some fancy labels that these themes don't have highlighting for.

Nested languages Base 16 Ocean Dark Solarized Light InspiredGithub

Example Code
Prints highlighted lines of a string to the terminal. See the easy and html module docs for more basic use case examples.

use syntect::easy::HighlightLines;
use syntect::parsing::SyntaxSet;
use syntect::highlighting::{ThemeSet, Style};
use syntect::util::{as_24_bit_terminal_escaped, LinesWithEndings};

// Load these once at the start of your program
let ps = SyntaxSet::load_defaults_newlines();
let ts = ThemeSet::load_defaults();

let syntax = ps.find_syntax_by_extension("rs").unwrap();
let mut h = HighlightLines::new(syntax, &ts.themes["base16-ocean.dark"]);
let s = "pub struct Wow { hi: u64 }\nfn blah() -> u64 {}";
for line in LinesWithEndings::from(s) {
    let ranges: Vec<(Style, &str)> = h.highlight_line(line, &ps).unwrap();
    let escaped = as_24_bit_terminal_escaped(&ranges[..], true);
    print!("{}", escaped);
}
Performance
Currently syntect is one of the faster syntax highlighting engines, but not the fastest. The following perf features are done:

 Pre-link references between languages (e.g <script> tags) so there are no tree traversal string lookups in the hot-path
 Compact binary representation of scopes to allow quickly passing and copying them around
 Determine if a scope is a prefix of another scope using bit manipulation in only a few instructions
 Cache regex matches to reduce number of times oniguruma is asked to search a line
 Accelerate scope lookups to reduce how much selector matching has to be done to highlight a list of scope operations
 Lazily compile regexes so startup time isn't taken compiling a thousand regexes for Actionscript that nobody will use
 Optionally use the fancy-regex crate. Unfortunately this isn't yet faster than oniguruma on our benchmarks but it might be in the future.
The current perf numbers are below. These numbers may get better if more of the things above are implemented, but they're better than many other text editors. All measurements were taken on a mid 2012 15" retina Macbook Pro, my new 2019 Macbook takes about 70% of these times.

Highlighting 9200 lines/247kb of jQuery 2.1 takes 600ms. For comparison:
Textmate 2, Spacemacs and Visual Studio Code all take around 2ish seconds (measured by hand with a stopwatch, hence approximate).
Atom takes 6 seconds
Sublime Text 3 dev build takes 98ms (highlighting only, takes ~200ms click to pixels), despite having a super fancy javascript syntax definition.
Vim is instantaneous but that isn't a fair comparison since vim's highlighting is far more basic than the other editors. Compare vim's grammar to Sublime's.
These comparisons aren't totally fair, except the one to Sublime Text since that is using the same theme and the same complex definition for ES6 syntax.
Simple syntaxes are faster, JS is one of the most complex. It only takes 34ms to highlight a 1700 line 62kb XML file or 50,000 lines/sec.
~138ms to load and link all the syntax definitions in the default Sublime package set.
but only ~23ms to load and link all the syntax definitions from an internal pre-made binary dump with lazy regex compilation.
~1.9ms to parse and highlight the 30 line 791 character testdata/highlight_test.erb file. This works out to around 16,000 lines/second or 422 kilobytes/second.
~250ms end to end for syncat to start, load the definitions, highlight the test file and shut down. This is mostly spent loading.
Feature Flags
Syntect makes heavy use of cargo features, to support users who require only a subset of functionality. In particular, it is possible to use the highlighting component of syntect without the parser (for instance when hand-rolling a higher performance parser for a particular language), by adding default-features = false to the syntect entry in your Cargo.toml.

For more information on available features, see the features section in Cargo.toml.

Pure Rust fancy-regex mode, without onig
Since 4.0 syntect offers an alternative pure-rust regex engine based on the fancy-regex engine which extends the awesome regex crate with support for fancier regex features that Sublime syntaxes need like lookaheads.

The advantage of fancy-regex is that it does not require the onig crate which requires building and linking the Oniguruma C library. Many users experience difficulty building the onig crate, especially on Windows and Webassembly.

As far as our tests can tell this new engine is just as correct, but it hasn't been tested as extensively in production. It also currently seems to be about half the speed of the default Oniguruma engine, although further testing and optimization (perhaps by you!) may eventually see it surpass Oniguruma's speed and become the default.

To use the fancy-regex engine with syntect, add it to your Cargo.toml like so:

syntect = { version = "4.2", default-features = false, features = ["default-fancy"]}
If you want to run examples with the fancy-regex engine you can use a command line like the following:

cargo run --features default-fancy --no-default-features --release --example syncat testdata/highlight_test.erb
Due to the way Cargo features work, if any crate you depend on depends on syntect without enabling fancy-regex then you'll get the default onig mode.

Note: The fancy-regex engine is absurdly slow in debug mode, because the regex engine (the main hot spot of highlighting) is now in Rust instead of C that's always built with optimizations. Consider using release mode or onig when testing.

Caching
Because syntect's API exposes internal cacheable data structures, there is a caching strategy that text editors can use that allows the text on screen to be re-rendered instantaneously regardless of the file size when a change is made after the initial highlight.

Basically, on the initial parse every 1000 lines or so copy the parse state into a side-buffer for that line. When a change is made to the text, because of the way Sublime Text grammars work (and languages in general), only the highlighting after that change can be affected. Thus when a change is made to the text, search backwards in the parse state cache for the last state before the edit, then kick off a background task to start re-highlighting from there. Once the background task highlights past the end of the current editor viewport, render the new changes and continue re-highlighting the rest of the file in the background.

This way from the time the edit happens to the time the new colouring gets rendered in the worst case only 999+length of viewport lines must be re-highlighted. Given the speed of syntect even with a long file and the most complicated syntax and theme this should take less than 100ms. This is enough to re-highlight on every key-stroke of the world's fastest typist in the worst possible case. And you can reduce this asymptotically to the length of the viewport by caching parse states more often, at the cost of more memory.

Any time the file is changed the latest cached state is found, the cache is cleared after that point, and a background job is started. Any already running jobs are stopped because they would be working on old state. This way you can just have one thread dedicated to highlighting that is always doing the most up-to-date work, or sleeping.

Parallelizing
Since 3.0, syntect can be used to do parsing/highlighting in parallel. SyntaxSet is both Send and Sync and so can easily be used from multiple threads. It is also Clone, which means you can construct a syntax set and then clone it to use for other threads if you prefer.

Compared to older versions, there's nothing preventing the serialization of a SyntaxSet either. So you can directly deserialize a fully linked SyntaxSet and start using it for parsing/highlighting. Before, it was always necessary to do linking first.

It is worth mentioning that regex compilation is done lazily only when the regexes are actually needed. Once a regex has been compiled, the compiled version is used for all threads after that. Note that this is done using interior mutability, so if multiple threads happen to encounter the same uncompiled regex at the same time, compiling might happen multiple times. After that, one of the compiled regexes will be used. When a SyntaxSet is cloned, the regexes in the cloned set will need to be recompiled currently.

For adding parallelism to a previously single-threaded program, the recommended thread pooling is rayon. However, if you're working in an already-threaded context where there might be more threads than you want (such as writing a handler for an Iron request), the recommendation is to force all highlighting to be done within a fixed-size thread pool using rust-scoped-pool. An example of the former is in examples/parsyncat.rs.

Examples Available
There's a number of examples of programs that use syntect in the examples folder and some code outside the repo:

syncat prints a highlighted file to the terminal using 24-bit colour ANSI escape codes. It demonstrates a simple file highlighting workflow.
synhtml prints an HTML file that will display the highlighted code. Demonstrates how syntect could be used by web servers and static site generators.
synstats collects a bunch of statistics about the code in a folder. Includes basic things like line count but also fancier things like number of functions. Demonstrates how syntect can be used for code analysis as well as highlighting, as well as how to use the APIs to parse out the semantic tokenization.
faiyels is a little code minimap visualizer I wrote that uses syntect for highlighting.
parsyncat is like syncat, but accepts multiple files and highlights them in parallel. It demonstrates how to use syntect from multiple threads.
Here's that stats that synstats extracts from syntect's codebase (not including examples and test data) as of this commit:

################## Stats ###################
File count:                               19
Total characters:                     155504

Function count:                          165
Type count (structs, enums, classes):     64

Code lines (traditional SLOC):          2960
Total lines (w/ comments & blanks):     4011
Comment lines (comment but no code):     736
Blank lines (lines-blank-comment):       315

Lines with a documentation comment:      646
Total words written in doc comments:    4734
Total words written in all comments:    5145
Characters of comment:                 41099
Projects using Syntect
Below is a list of projects using Syntect, in approximate order by how long they've been using syntect (feel free to send PRs to add to this list):

bat, a cat(1) clone, uses syntect for syntax highlighting.
Bolt, a desktop application for building and testing APIs, uses syntect for syntax highlighting.
catmark, a console markdown printer, uses syntect for code blocks.
Cobalt, a static site generator that uses syntect for highlighting code snippets.
crowbook, a Markdown book generator, uses syntect for code blocks.
delta, a syntax-highlighting pager for Git.
Docket, a documentation site generator that uses syntect for highlighting.
hors, instant coding answers via command line, uses syntect for highlighting code blocks.
mdcat, a console markdown printer, uses syntect for code blocks.
Scribe, a Rust text editor framework which uses syntect for highlighting.
syntect_server, an HTTP server for syntax highlighting.
Television, a fast and versatile fuzzy finder TUI.
tokio-cassandra, CQL shell in Rust, uses syntect for shell colouring.
xi-editor, a text editor in Rust which uses syntect for highlighting.
Zola, a static site generator that uses syntect for highlighting code snippets.
The Way, a code snippets manager for your terminal that uses syntectfor highlighting.
Broot, a terminal file manager, uses syntect for file previews.
Rusty Slider, a markdown slideshow presentation application, uses syntect for code blocks.
Typst, a typesetting system and LaTeX alternative, uses syntect for highlighting code blocks.
bingus-blog, a blog software written in Rust, uses syntect for fenced code blocks.
BugStalker, modern debugger for Linux x86-64. Written in Rust for Rust programs.
Yazi, blazing fast terminal file manager based on async I/O, uses syntect for text file previews.
CodeSnap.nvim, snapshot plugin for Neovim, that uses syntect for code syntax highlighting.
code-to-pdf, a tool that generates a syntax-highlighted PDF of a directory
Comrak, a CommonMark parser and formatter that uses syntect for highlighting code blocks.
zsh-patina, a blazingly fast Zsh syntax highlighter.
License and Acknowledgements
Thanks to Robin Stocker, Keith Hall and Martin Nordholts for making awesome substantial contributions of the most important impressive improvements syntect has had post-v1.0! They deserve lots of credit for where syntect is today. For example @robinst implemented fancy-regex support and a massive refactor to enable parallel highlighting using an arena. @keith-hall found and fixed many bugs and implemented Sublime syntax test support.

Thanks to Textmate 2 and @defuz's sublimate for the existing open source code I used as inspiration and in the case of sublimate's tmTheme loader, copy-pasted. All code (including defuz's sublimate code) is released under the MIT license.

About
Rust library for syntax highlighting using Sublime Text syntax definitions.

docs.rs/syntect
Topics
syntax-highlighting crates
Resources
 Readme
License
 MIT license
 Activity
Stars
 2.3k stars
Watchers
 16 watching
Forks
 169 forks
Report repository
Releases 32
v5.3.0
Latest
on Sep 27, 2025
+ 31 releases
Packages
No packages published
Contributors
84
@trishume
@Enselic
@keith-hall
@robinst
@stefanobaghino
@CosmicHorrorDev
@cmyr
@sharkdp
@rhysd
@rdnetto
@qtfkwk
@jrappen
@quasicomputational
@est31
+ 70 contributors
Languages
Rust
99.7%
 
Makefile
0.3%
Footer
© 2026 GitHub, Inc.
Footer navigation
Terms
Privacy
Security
Status
Community
Docs
Contact
Manage cookies
Do not share my personal information
